# Chapter 0: Randomness

## Random Walks

**Random walk** - a path defined as a series of random steps.

Random walks are useful for modeling phenomena likes molecules moving in a gas, an animal foraging for food, or a gambler at a casino.

The random walk is important to consider because it is central to the two questions constantly asked throughout this course.

- _"How do you define the rules that govern the behavior of your objects?"_
- _"How do you implement these rules in code?"_

## random()

The `random()` function from p5.js produces a **uniform distribution**, where the selection of numbers is relatively even over time. The random numbers generated by the function are **pseudorandom**, meaning they are generated from an algorithm meant to simulate random.

A uniform randomness isn't always what you want when trying to simulate the complexity of natural systems and organisms. For this reason, we actually leverage `random()` to return **nonuniform distributions**, where some numbers are favored over others. This approach is helpful when building out more complex natural systems, such as the Darwinian idea of "survival of the fittest".

One way of using `random()` to provide an array with duplicated values.

```ts
let randomNums = [1, 1, 2, 3, 3]
let value = random(randomNums)
console.log(value)
```

Another way is to ask for a random number then allow an event to happen depending on wether or not that random number fits into a certain window.

```ts
let probability = 0.1 // 10%
let random = random(1) // A random float from 0.1

if (random < probability) {
  console.log('Sing!') // will occur on average 10% of the time
}
```

You can even create complex cases based on this approach

```ts
let random = random(1)

if (random < 0.6) {
  console.log("Sing!")
} else if (random < 0.7) {
  console.log("Dance!")
} else {
  console.log("Sleep")
}
```

We can apply this type of nonuniform distribution to our `Walker` class and simulate a tendency towards direction.

## Some Basic Probability Principles

I am adding some definitions here since I didn't take Statistics or Probability in college and it's been over 15 years since I studied it.

**Single-Event Probability** - The likelihood that a given event will occur.
**Outcomes** - All possible results of a random process.  
**Event** - The specific outcome or combination of outcomes being considered.

### Exercise 0.2  

> What is the probability of drawing two aces in a row from a deck of 52 cards, if you reshuffle your first draw back into the deck before making your second draw? What would that probability be if you didn't reshuffle after your first draw?

_Probability of drawing an ace from a deck_  
`number of aces / number of cards = 4/52 = 0.077 ≈ 8%`  

_Probability of drawing a diamond from a deck_  
`number of aces / number of cards = 13/52 = 0.25 = 25%`  

**The probability of multiple events occurring can be calculated by multiplying the individual properties of each event.**

_Probability of a coin turning up heads three times in a row_  
`(1/2) * (1/2) * (1/2) = 1/8 = 0.125 = 12.5%`  

#### Solution  

```ts
const probAceFromDeck = 4 / 52 // => 7.7%;
const probAceTwiceFromDeck = probAceFromDeck * probAceFromDeck // => 0.6% ;
```
